Running notes:

>	ibmcloud version
>	ibmcloud Resource Service-Instance
>	ibmcloud ks cluster ls
> 	ibmcloud login --apikey <key>



Cloud essentials

Learning Objectives, After completing this module, you will be able to: 

Summarize what IBM Cloud can do, at a high level 
Explain the various categories of services and offerings available on IBM Cloud 
Work with the IBM Cloud dashboard and CLI to manage your services 
Set up basic IAM configurations for an IBM Cloud account 


IBM Cloud is a combination of Platform as a Service (PaaS), Infrastructure as a Service (IaaS), and Software as a Service (SaaS).
Users can deploy over 200 services from containers, data and AI, to blockchain and more. 

IBM Cloud maintains 60 data centers worldwide, enabling local deployment and global scalability. 47 Fortune 50 companies trust mission-critical applications on IBM Cloud’s infrastructure.

With open-source technologies, such as Kubernetes, Red Hat OpenShift, and compute options such as virtual machines and bare metal, you have the control and flexibility to support workloads in the environment of your choice.

The IBM Cloud platform is composed of multiple components that work together to provide a consistent and dependable cloud experience.

	The IBM Cloud platform is composed of a robust console that serves as the front end for managing your resources,
	an identity and access management component for authentication and access control,
	a catalog consisting hundreds of offerings, and
	an account and billing management system that provides exact usage for pricing plans.

One of the main ways of accessing IBM Cloud is through the IBM Cloud Console. From the
console you can:

read the Docs to learn more about products,
use the Catalog to create new resources,
access the IBM Cloud resources you have provisioned,
use the support tab to open a ticket, 
and invite new users using the user management tab.

The IBM Cloud command-line interface (CLI) allows you to programmatically interact with IBM Cloud through a terminal or shell.

The IBM Cloud CLI is supported by Mac, Linux, and Windows, extendable with plugins, and available through the Console via the IBM Cloud Shell terminal

To interact with services IBM Cloud provides API’s (Application Programming Interface) and SDKs (Software Development Kit).

For example, a developer can use the REST APIs to analyze text content, in the programming language of their choice while SDKs allow a developer to target a specific language. SDKs include support for Python, Node.js, Java, Swift, and other languages depending on the service.

IBM is committed to providing our clients with data privacy, security, and governance solutions to assist them in their journey to compliance readiness. IBM Cloud is built on best-in-industry security standards, including GDPR, HIPAA, ISO 9001, PCI, and SOC2.

Let's look at the IBM Cloud Console in a little bit more detail.
Here on my dashboard you can see my resource summary, which is the most important pane.
Here you can see the Cloud Foundry services I've deployed, my other services I have deployed,storage, and developer tools.
You can also see Classic Infrastructure, your recent support cases, and any IBM Cloud status here as well.
Once you click on catalog, you'll be brought to the IBM Cloud products catalog.
Here you can quickly search for and create an instance of whatever product you may want.
Next, you may want to go into the Docs.
This will show you the documentation for any product you want.
Next, if you click on the support tab, you'll go and be able to raise a ticket, and we will explore this later in one of the modules of the course.
Lastly, in your Manage tab, you can see the status of your account and any sort of billing and usage, and IAM, which we will cover later in the course as well.

Here, we also have the IBM Cloud shell.

And lastly, we have the Cost estimator tool. We'll cover this later in the course as well.

To get started with the IBM Cloud Shell, click on the icon on the top right. First, we'll check the version of our IBM Cloud CLI by issuing the command 
>	ibmcloud version
Next, we'll list all of our service instances on our account by issuing the command 
>	ibmcloud Resource Service-Instance.
Here we see all the instances that are deployed in our account.
Lastly, we will list all of the Kubernetes clusters we have running with the 
>	ibmcloud ks cluster ls
This is the basic overview of the IBM cloud.
Let's summarize:
IBM cloud combines Platform as a Service (PaaS), Infrastructure as a Service (IaaS) and Software
as a Service (SaaS).
IBM cloud has a catalog of over 200 products and services covering containers, data and
AI Blockchain and more.
IBM cloud is committed to compliance and has more than 60 data centers globally.


single zone
multi zone 
federal zone 

IBM Cloud can deploy workloads in over 6 regions, 18 availability zones and 60 data centers

This network spans 19 countries on six continents.

The six IBM Cloud regions are 
Dallas, 
Washington DC 
London, 
Frankfurt, 
Tokyo,
Sydney.

Locations: geography

north america south
north america east  
north america west 
south America
Europe 
Asia Pacific

they further drill down as below: country, metro, Data center (zones)



IBM Cloud has three main types of accounts.
It has Lite accounts which are free of charge.	- 40 services
Pay-as-You-Go accounts which allow you to access all IBM Cloud services - all services , basic support and prod usecases 
Subscription accounts which are available for enterprise customers. - discounted pricing, all services

support:

basic - 24x7 chat and phone
Advanced - + 1 < 1 , 2<2 , 3 <4
Premium  - + 1 <15m , 2< 1 , 3<2 , tech accnt  mgr assigned

billing:

monthly overview, By service, Export usage as CSV


cost tool:

estimate cost of a service (all services supported)
convert to currencies (can convert to 15 currencies)
Export the estimate

IAM:

users and access groups
Services and resources
Access Policies


users > Access groups
Resources > resource groups

(account owner) Acount > many users with their email addresses 

services > vms, Object storage, DB etc.
Resources > a resource is a provisioned service ex: vm-dev, vm-prod,  db-dev, db-prod 

users > invited to join accounts , API keys support for authentication, IAM roles and  aceess are associated with a user
	roles can be : viewer, operator, editor, Adminstrator

access groups> collection of users (admins, billing, basic users) , allows for cleaner seperation of control, users can be part of 	multiple AG

resources >  instance of a service , have automatic service id when created, users can select a region to create the resource , service roles dictate permissions for the services APIS
	roles: reder, writer, manager 

resource groups > collection of resources , rgs are specified at service creation time, it has no geographical restrictions

bringing them all together is called Access Policy the combination of subject, role and target
ex: 
subject > users , access groups
role> manager, editor
target > resources, resource groups

---------------------

Virtual servers:

There are four types of virtual server offerings on IBM cloud.

virtual server service. - This is your usual virtual machine type service that offers a range of operating system and configurable RAM and processing power to fit your use case.

bare metal service. - This service provides you the raw horsepower that you need for processing intensive and disk IO intensive workloads.

power system service. - This service, as its name implies, allows you to spin up power system servers with operating systems such as AIX and IBM I.

hyper protect service. - This service allows you to run virtual servers on IBM Linux 1. You get access to Z technology without having to purchase any unique hardware.

There are different types of virtual servers: can be deployed on any 6 regions
Public servers or multi-tenant:  are billed hourly or monthly.
Dedicated servers:  are like public servers but they're single tenant. No noisy neighbors, so a little bit more expensive 
transient servers:  are the least expensive option, but are  de provisioned as capacity grows.
reserved servers:  These are committed to a one- or three-year contract.
Images: Redhat, Ubuntu, Centos, Debian, Microsoft (with different versions)
we can select upto:
64vCPU, 512 RAM , 1Gbps network speed, 5 SAN volumes, 2 GPUs which based off the NVIDIA Tesla P-100 cards.

bare metal: can be deployed on any 6 regions
billing: Hourly, Monthly, 1yrm 3yr contract
Images: Redhat, Ubuntu, Centos, Debian, Microsoft (with different versions) + VMware, citrix, no OS, Cloud linux 
Vmware , SAP certificed offering available 
4 to 72 core 
up to 6TB ram and upto 36 drives
GPU support which based off the NVIDIA Tesla P-100 cards.


Power systems: Europe, North america south, north america east
Machine types: e880, s922
Images: AIX and IBM I (with different version) or bring your own linux

Hyper protect: Europe, North america south, north america east , asia pacific 
Linux one, secure, Easy to deploy, no Z skills required

virtual servers are low at price but not great at performance or security.
Power systems are great at performace 
Bare metals are very expensive and give high performace
Hyper protect z are great at security 


 ---------------------

Block and File storage:

Block storage: 
File storage:

common between the above 2:
size range from 20GB to 12TB , encryption at rest with no extra cost, no of IOPS up to 48k,  can be provisoned in any DC in the world,
can take snapshots manually or can be scheduled 

diff between abv two:
Block storage uses iSCSI, file use NFS
Block can attach to only 1 host at a time file can be attached to many.
Block storage ideal for high intense workloads like db , file storage ideal for low intensity workloads

Cloud backup: back up and restore data between servers in one or more DC
adv: highly customizable - daily / wekly , OS / specific directory 
its browser based portal, one click restore 
Plugins for Ms sql, MS sharepoint, Oracle 
end to end encryption - 256 bit private key encryption 
geo-redundancy

gotacha - after creating the storage, you have to attach to VM and then within VM you have to mount. 

Object storage: ( seperate lecture)
used for storing vast amount of unstructured data , files are uploaded as objects and saved in to buckets , it has not directory structure just metadata will be available about storage location and date time of insertion etc.

advantages of COS: Access mgmt enabled , encrypted by default additonally u can use your own keys using ibm key protect, sql query supports, high speed transfer, SDKs and APIS

Object storage resiliency have 3 options:
 can store in cross regions - for high availability
 dedicated region - gives high service integration and performace 
 single DC - when you have restrictions to store data within country 
service integration, performace and availability differs based on your selection.

there are 4 storage clases available for IBM COS:

smart tier - high cost saving and accesibility
standard - expensive but highly accessible
vault - high cost saving and accesibility ideal to use when you access the files once in a month
cold valut - high cost saving, less accessible . ideal may be used once or twice an year. 

 ---------------------

 Network Services:

 two different network services

 CIS ( Cloud internet services): - using cloudflare

DNS (Domain name service) - for host name resolution
Transport layer security (TLS) - to secure data
Global Load balancer (GLB) -  to reduce latency and icrease availability by routing based on server availability and health
Rate limiting - Which automatically identifies and mitigates excessive requests  
Ddos Protection -  A scalable and configurable service that protects againist brute force atacks
smart routing - which ensures content is delivered on the fastest path from end user to application 
Web Application Firewall (WAF) -  a layered defense to protect data against sophisticated attackers and malicious bots
caching - which reduces latency and improves performance.

networking Infrastructure services:

Direct links - creates a direct private connection between remote networks and IBM Cloud. With direct link you have a secure dedicated connectivity. It gives you private access to IBM Cloud infrastructure. It offers a fully integrated hybrid environment. Whether your resources are in a data center or on IBM Cloud, direct link is perfect for creating multi cloud connectivity in a single environment.
with direct link you can choose speed between 50 mbps to 10 gbps

CDN - A CDN is a highly distributed platform of servers to help minimize delays. based on akamai , smarter scaling, secure , u can use it to optimize dynamic content , usage based pricing 

Load Balancer - used to distribute traffic among to your virtual servers. You can choose between an IBM Cloud load balancer or a Citrix Netscaler VPX load balancer. Layer 4 and layer 7 , Public and private, server health checks, SSL offload,  monitoring metrics.

Gateway Appliance  -enables you to create virtual routers, firewalls and private networking devices.

Firewall - There are both hardware and software-based firewalls. These will prevent malicious activity, helping to ensure uptime of your server. You can add a firewall to a specific virtual server.

VPN - VPNs facilitate connectivity from your network to IBM's private network.

Subnet and IPs - subnets provide additional IP addresses for virtual machines. They are managed independently of virtual machine resources and are available until cancelled.

VLAN - A VLAN is used to provide packet identification and to let multiple workloads coexist on the same physical equipment.

 ---------------------

VPC ( Virtual Private Cloud):

a secure isolated private cloud hosted within a public cloud with an on-demand configurable pool of shared resources allocated within a public cloud environment. There is isolation between users achieved through private IP subnets and encrypted communication channels. authenticates users and provides remote access to the shared resources. This is essentially allowing organizations to work on a virtually private cloud.

Virtual private clouds provide the necessary infrastructure in isolation as a fully automated solution.

key componets of VPC are: 
VPC network > Availability zone > subnet >> Virtual server instances, k8s, ssh keys, block storage, floating ip, lb, public gateway , vpn gateway. by default  a 100 Gigabyte General purpose block storage volume is created automatically.
the VPC network has access to many cloud services such as AI, databases, IoT and Container Registry. The network also has access to DevOps services including monitoring, log analysis, and continuous delivery.

in IBM cloud we have two generations of VPC - 
gen1 - available on all 6 regions, upto 16gbps networking , provider manged security or bring your own
gen2 - available in 5 regions, upto 80gbps networking, provider manged security only

 ---------------------

 vmware:

 In 2016, IBM Cloud became the first cloud vendor to bring VMware services to the cloud.

 VMWare dedicated - Baremetal solution with vCenter and Vsphere options
: 	customer has access to the hypervisor.
	vcenter - fully automated VMware based software defined data center
	vsphere - Manually configure networking , storage and addons
	Bring your own licence
	add on services( veeam , zerto, f5 big ip and 10 more)

Vmware shared - Maanged deployment of vcloud director
:	IBM manages the hypervisor
	cost effective
	Perfect for temporary migration and burst
	Disaster recovery
	Self-service

---------------------

k8s, Openshift, cloud foundary, cloud functions 

Containers and kubernetes:

IKS - IBM cloud kubernetes service
: 	fully maged environment with upgrades
	secure cluster with (PCI, HIPPA ready ,SOC1 and many more)
	singe and multizone configurations
	supported add ons (service mesh or serverless add ons with few clicks)
	logging and monitoring

	available in all 6 regions 
	types: 	virtual shared (2vcpu/4gb ram - 64/512), 
			virtual dedicated (2vcpu/4gb ram - 56/242)(single tenant instance), 
			baremetal (4vcpu/32gb ram - 28/512), 

	billing: hourly, monthly, free (at this moment)

container registry - a fully managed multi-tenant registry, hig available, public and private, vulnarability advisor
helm catalog - access to IBM products, opensource projects like jenkins, tekton , multiple architecture like x86 powerNZ

You first start off by logging into your IBM Cloud account.
You select a region, you select a resource group, then you list or push images into a container registry with the IBM Cloud CR images command. You can list or create new Kubernetes clusters with the IBM Cloud KS command, and you can interact with your Kubernetes cluster with the kubectl Command.

---------------------

Openshift:

it is based on open source project (OKD) 
it is a lyaer built on top of kubernetes
deployable on-premise or on a cloud
enhanced security from RHEL


k8s - quatr minor release 1.19 is latest , core network, the platform or user is responsible for integrating beyond the core framework.
os - quatr release 4.4 is latest , k8s core + abstraction, opinions, an integration of common features are included.

So how does OpenShift extend Kubernetes?
The first is it provides an integrated Container Registry.
It has a powerful integrated console that improve the experience for developers and operators.
OpenShift takes the Kubernetes namespace concept and extends it with projects, allowing you to control access between who can access namespaces or projects.
OpenShift greatly simplifies developer workflow with source to image and routes.
Lastly, system administrators can use built-in monitoring tools like Grafana and Prometheus.

IBM Cloud offers a highly available, fully managed OpenShift offering. In a matter of minutes, you can spin up your own OpenShift cluster and start deploying applications, allowing developers to focus on creating applications, not managing infrastructure.

other benifits including - automated upgrades and patching
secure clusters ( PIC , HIPPA ready , SOC1 n more)
single and multizone configurations
integrated with logDNA and sysdig
Multiple versions supported (3.11 , 4.x)

available in all 6 regions

virtually shared, vitrtually dedicated, bare metal
same profiles ((2vcpu/4gb ram - 64/512) like k8s
billing is hourly and monthly - no free tier

whats new on OS4: Operator framework, Openshift service mesh based on ISTIO, OS serverless computing based on K native , OS pipelines based on tekton, codeready workspaces (Red Hat Code ready workspaces uses Kubernetes and containers to provide a user with a consistent
and secure development environment.)

ways to try OS: IBM cloud, IBM Z, IBM power, aws, Azure and gcp, redhat os platform, rh virtualization, OS playground, RH code ready containers, VMware vsphere or any other baremetal

---------------------

cloud foundary:

it is a PaaS offering: 

traditional IT: X
IaaS: networking, storage, servers, virtualization
PaaS: networking, storage, servers, virtualization, O/S, Middleware, Runtime
SaaS: networking, storage, servers, virtualization, O/S, Middleware, Runtime, Data, Application

its an Opensource project that had its initial release in 2011. In 2015, the project was transferred to the newly created Cloud Foundry Foundation. The source code for Cloud Foundry is under an Apache license.

deployment automation - You can deploy apps to Cloud Foundry using existing tools with zero modification to the code.

Flexible Infrastructure: By decoupling applications from infrastructure, you can make individual decisions about where to host workloads on premise, in public clouds or in managed infrastructure.

commercial Options: Cloud Foundry is container-based architecture runs apps in the most popular programming languages. And on the choice of your cloud infrastructure. IBM Cloud, AWS, Azure, GCP and more.

Community support: Over 3,500 contributors 12,000 Slack participants and 850 meetups worldwide.

when you deploy with Cloud Foundry on IBM Cloud, you'll get a fully managed multi-tenant environment.
There are three ways to deploy your Cloud Foundry application on IBM Cloud.

-	The first is to add a toolchain that includes the IBM Cloud continuous delivery service to your application.
-	you can deploy from the application level console.
-	bind to other IBM services automatically.

There are many benefits to using Cloud Foundry on IBM Cloud.
These include access control.
You can set up fine grain assignment of compute capacity to development teams with IBM Cloud
IAM policies.
Health management.
Applications that are crashing will automatically try to restart.
Automatic routing.
Publicly reachable URLs are automatically created for your applications.
It's also Lite tier compatible.
No credit card required.
The Lite tier limit has a memory of 256 megabytes of application runtime.
This is good enough for most weekend projects.
There are many Cloud Foundry runtimes that are supported on IBM Cloud.
This includes Java, node.js, Python, Go, Swift, PHP.net, Tomcat ,and Ruby.

manifest.yaml  - name, buildpack, memory, instances

ibmcloud cf push 

as alternate to cf we have - google app engine , aws elastic beanstack 

---------------------

Cloud functions: (serverless)

no server or resource management
focus on microservices
Pay only for code execution

IBM cloud functions is a functions as a service (FaaS) based on opensource project Apache openwhisk which has 
integrated API gateway : An API gateway is a component of cloud functions to expose API's. It comes with security, oauth support, rate limiting and custom domain support.

IBM Cloud functions also supports open API, previously known as swagger.

Cloud functions have built in integrations with other IBM Cloud services such as AI, databases, object storage.

It also has support for external providers such as GitHub and GitLab. 

IBM Cloud functions offer up to 5 million free executions per month.

And lastly, there is logging in monitoring through the IBM Cloud Console.

When talking about cloud functions, we have to talk about actions, triggers, and sequences.

Actions -  are the building blocks of your serverless architecture.They contain the code performing the work and can be invoked via a rest API or trigger.

Triggers - receive events from outside IBM Cloud functions and invoke all connected actions. (A webhook for a GitHub repository would be an example of a trigger.)

Sequences - invoke multiple actions in linear order.This makes it possible to pass parameters from one function to the next.

sample usecase - ETL , Alarm driven (batch or cron, one time or repeated)

Cloud functions on IBM Cloud support many different runtimes.
You have the option of choosing from Java, Node, Python, Go, Swift, PHP, Ruby or any other language or framework by leveraging containers.

---------------------

Databases:

an organized collection of data - SQL, NoSQL

Relational - SQL used to update and query db
Relational databases are also great for asset compliance and high transaction applications such as online transaction processing.

Document - NoSQL document stores include customer data, user generated content, and order data.

Key Value - noSQL databases are leaderboards, caches, and shopping cart data

Database as a service is a cloud computing service that lets users access and use a cloud
DBaaS - cost effective mgmt, secure, available and scalable, Faster time to market
:	DB2, DB2 hosted (with admin access) , MySQL, Postgres
: 	Mongo , Cloudant (based on couchDB with 99.99% SLA), Elastic search
:	Redis, etcd 


---------------------

Integration:

integrations used to send data between applications : it provides connectivity, routing and transformation and enables sharing data, connecting applications and security

comes as free and lite tier plan

API connect: provides API creation and management with security rich features and centralized governance.
:	geenrate swaggger APIs, Graphically assemble APIs, Share APIs with self service portal, API analytics

APP connect: allows you to connect your applications, automate tasks with hundreds of built-in connectors.
:	Automate your workflow, Integrate with 75+ connectors, use 50+ templates to get connected, create and expose flows as REST APIs.

Event Streams: which is a high throughput message bus built with Apache Kafka.
: Fully managed kafka service, HA, Intutive User experience, Event driven architecture, integrates with IBM services


MQ: which provides enterprise grade messaging.
: Fully managed messaging service, extend messaging to the cloud, IBM cloud and AWS compatible, use MQ explore or console

---------------------

Artificial Intelligence:

data science - is a a method for creating insights from data using analytics and machine learning

Many usecases from all industries : healthcare, banking, Education
80% of data scientist time finding , cleaning and organizing the data.
Once we have data, we can built models that can predict and forecast

AI - is a huge field with many different domains

machine learning, NLP, Speech, Vision, robotics , Planning and optimization

AI framework - Tensor flow, scikit learn, pytorch


AI on IBM :

AI lifecycle management tools : 
watson studio : Build ,run and manage AI models  
watson ML: Run anddeploy models
Knowledge catalog: categorize and share data and models
watson Openscale: Monitor AI models
Natural language understanding: uses deeplearning to extract metadata
tone analyser: analyse and understands emotion
Watson assistant 
Discovery:search service
Knowledge studio, Speech to text , text to speech, Language translator (can translate upto 68 languages)
Natural language classifier : assign custom categories to inputted text

---------------------

Analytics:

the science of analysing raw data inorder to make conclusions about that information

Analytics cycle - Planning, descriptive, Diagnostic, Predictive , Prespective

apache spark , hadoop

IBM offers  5 different analytics services

Analytics engine: spark and haddop, scalability, HIPPA ready in dallas region, Customizable env
Streaming analytics: support for text audio video, real time analytics , integrates with spark and hadoop, built in domain analytics
DB2 wearhouse: train ML models, Highly scalable, secure, Oracle compatible
cognos Dashboard: creae visualization, live connection to data, embed visualization, explore data
Information server: Extract transform laod with dataStage, DataLineage with information govt catalog, data profiling with info visualizer.

---------------------

DevOps:

IBM support toolchain

Code: gilabCE, github, bitbucket
delivery: HELM, Razee, tekton
run: cf, k8s, virtual servers
learn: new relic, google analytics, sauce labs
culture: slack, pagerduty, jira

---------------------

Block Chain:

a permanant,growling list of records of records called blocks linked using cryptography
genesis block - first block

block chains are distributed, immutable, smart contracts

Hyperledger fabric is foundation framework to build blockchain apps.

supported by aliyun, aws, gcp, azure and ibm, oracle 

Opensource hosted by linux foundation

smart contracts -code that stored in a block chain and automatically executes.
consensus - how nodes agree on order of transacation

---------------------

IOT - use cases

Predective mentainance
Asset tracking 
Connected vehicles

	- connect and register devices
	- Information mgmt.
	- real time analysis
	- Risk and security management

ibm cloud IOD dashboard gives:

connected devices
show data transfered
monitor sensors
geo visualization
---------------------

Cloud Packs:

containerized software solutions built to run anywhere (IBM cloud, on-prem any cloud)

values of cp:
Modular architecture - you can pick and choose which software to apply
Put AI to work 
Built on openshift

cp for - apps, data, integrations, automation, security, multicloud mgmt